docs/installation.md, before:

---
layout: docs
title: Installation
prev_section: quickstart
next_section: composing
permalink: /docs/installation/
---

### Latest image
The lastest version of the *Spec* source code can be found [here](https://github.com/SpecForPharo/spec).

A jenkins job builds an image based on the latests [Pharo](http://www.pharo-project.org/home) image and the lastest *Spec* version.
This image can be downloaded [here](http://ezial.dyndns.org:9095/view/My%20branches/job/Spec/lastSuccessfulBuild/artifact/Spec.zip).

### Documentation
The latests *Spec* documentation is available [here](https://github.com/SpecForPharo/documentation). A markdown version of the [output](https://github.com/SpecForPharo/documentation/blob/master/output/book.md) can be found in this repository.

### Material

If you are curious about *Spec* and you want to read more. Or you want to have a nice *Spec* icon, some material can be found in a dedicated [repository](https://github.com/SpecForPharo/material).

### Website

This website can also be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/SpecForPharo/website). Feel free to fork it if you want to contribute <i class="fa fa-smile-o"></i>

Commit message:

Better styling for St code Better doc page for installing Adds a More doc page

docs/installation.md, after:

---
layout: docs
title: Installation
prev_section: quickstart
next_section: composing
permalink: /docs/installation/
---

To fetch the latest *Spec* version, you first need to get a local copy of the repository:

{% highlight bash %}
~ $ cd /tmp
tmp $ git clone https://github.com/SpecForPharo/spec.git
{% endhighlight %}

Then open your image and execute the following script:

{% highlight smalltalk %}
| repo names currentVersions toLoad |

repo := MCFileTreeRepository new directory: '/tmp/spec' asFileReference.

currentVersions := MCWorkingCopy allManagers 
	select: [ :e | (e ancestry ancestors) notEmpty ]
	thenCollect: [ :e | e ancestry ancestors first name ].
names := repo packageDescriptionsFromReadableFileNames.
toLoad := names select: [ :e || currentVersion | 
	currentVersion := e first , '-', e second , '.', e third asString.
	(currentVersions includes: currentVersion) not ].

toLoad do: [ :name || version |
	version := repo versionFromFileNamed: name first, '.package'.
	[ version load ]
		on: MCMergeOrLoadWarning
		do: [ :ex | [ ex load  ] on: MCNoChangesException do: [] ] ].
{% endhighlight %}

Your image contains now the latest stable version of *Spec*.
